Draft blog post for 6.0 alpha (#107)
JabRef/blog.jabref.org: _posts/2024-12-23-JabRef6-0-alpha.md

---
title: 🎄 JabRef 6.0-Alpha Release 🎄
tags: [Release]
---

We are excited to publish the first Alpha version of the upcoming Version 6.0. JabRef 6.0 Alpha already brings many new features, improvements and fixes.

> Since this is an alpha release. There are still a few issues regarding the new search, and we are looking for your feedback to make sure the 6.0 stable will be a great release!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Since this is an alpha release, there are still a few issues regarding the new search, and we are looking for your feedback to make sure the 6.0 stable will be a great release!
```

> This is an alpha release, there are still a few issues regarding the new search. However, we are still looking for your feedback to make sure the 6.0 stable will be a great release!.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This is an alpha release. There are still a few issues regarding the new search and we are looking for your feedback to make sure the 6.0 stable will be a great release!
```

Reviewer: Will be a comma then

> As always, we recommend making a backup of your bib files before trying out the new version.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
As always, but this time especially, we recommend making a backup of your bib files before trying out the new version.
```

## Release Highlights

> This release contains the results of this year's three GSOC projects.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This release contains the results of this year's three GSoC projects.
```

### AI feature

> The two basic AI features are "AI based Summary for linked PDFs" and "AI chat". The latter one allows you to ask the AI questions about the linked paper's content. Learn more about the features in the [GSOC blog post on AI feature](https://blog.jabref.org/2024/08/21/AI-chatting/).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The two basic AI features are "AI based Summary for linked PDFs" and "AI chat". The latter one allows you to ask the AI questions about the linked paper's content. Learn more about the features in the [GSoC blog post on AI feature](https://blog.jabref.org/2024/08/21/AI-chatting/).
```

> We know that some people are hesistant regarding AI stuff and therefore it's an opt-in.
> 
> The two basic AI features are "AI based Summary for linked PDFs" and "AI chat". The latter one allows you to ask the AI questions about the linked paper's content. Learn more about the features in the [GSOC blog post on AI feature](https://blog.jabref.org/2024/08/21/AI-chatting/).
> 
> We also took this as an opportunity to improve the importing and offline parsing of PDFs, e.g. searching the PDF contents for a DOI.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The two basic AI features are "AI based Summary for linked PDFs" and "AI chat". The latter one allows you to ask the AI questions about the linked paper's content. Learn more about the features in the [GSOC blog post on AI feature](https://blog.jabref.org/2024/08/21/AI-chatting/).

We also took this as an opportunity to improve the importing and offline parsing of PDFs, e.g. searching the PDF contents for a DOI.

We know that some people are hesistant to use AI technology and therefore these features are set up as opt-in feature.
```

### CSL Style support in LibreOffice

> A long standing wish from many users could be integrated into JabRef, the support for using CSL styles in LibreOffice. You can now chosee between the old jstyles and the new CSL styles when inserting citations in LibreOffice. To learn more about this feature check out the  [GSOC blog post on CSL Libre Office integration](https://blog.jabref.org/2024/08/26/GSoC-CSL/).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A long standing wish from many users could be integrated into JabRef, the support for using CSL styles in LibreOffice. You can now choose between the old jstyles and the new CSL styles when inserting citations in LibreOffice. To learn more about this feature check out the  [GSOC blog post on CSL Libre Office integration](https://blog.jabref.org/2024/08/26/GSoC-CSL/).
```

> A long standing wish from many users could be integrated into JabRef, the support for using CSL styles in LibreOffice. You can now choose between the old jstyles and the new CSL styles when inserting citations in LibreOffice. To learn more about this feature check out the  [GSOC blog post on CSL Libre Office integration](https://blog.jabref.org/2024/08/26/GSoC-CSL/).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A long standing wish from many users could finally be integrated into JabRef - the support for using CSL styles via our LibreOffice integration. You can now choose between the old Jstyles and the new CSL styles when inserting citations into LibreOffice and generating bibliographies. To learn more about this feature check out the  [GSoC blog post on CSL LibreOffice integration](https://blog.jabref.org/2024/08/26/GSoC-CSL/).
```

### New Search backend and floating mode

> The second big new feature is the new search. The new search is now based on an embedded PostgresSQL database. Originally it was planned to use Lucene as well but due to limitations this was switched during the GSOC project.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Another big new feature is the new search. It got a huge rework and is now based on an embedded PostgresSQL database, which notably offers huge performance gains, as felt by larger libraries. Originally it was planned to use Lucene, but due to limitations encountered, this was switched during the GSOC project.
```

> Another big new feature is the new search. It got a huge rework and is now based on an embedded PostgresSQL database, which notably offers huge performance gains, as felt by larger libraries. Originally it was planned to use Lucene, but due to limitations encountered, this was switched during the GSOC project.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Another big new feature is the new search. It got a huge rework and is now based on an embedded PostgresSQL database, which notably offers huge performance gains, as felt when working with larger libraries. Originally it was planned to use Lucene, but due to limitations encountered, this was switched during the GSoC project.
```

As part of this we finally brought back the so called "floating mode" for searches ![alt text](/img/Floating_Mode_Light_Theme.png) and fixed various other UI issues related to the search.

### Other changes

Other notable changes inlcude:

- a new Mardown Export format
- the Medline/Pubmed importer imports PMID as well,
- Performance improvements when indexing linked files
- Clicking on a field in the integrity check now jumps to the corresponding field in the entry editor

Take a look at the [changelog](https://github.com/JabRef/jabref/blob/main/CHANGELOG.md) for a full list of all changes.

## Known issues

### Google Summer of Code

> We thank Gogle for the opporthnity and all three GSOC contributors for enhancing JabRef!

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We thank Google for the opporthnity and all three GSoC contributors for enhancing JabRef!
```

### Special Thanks

This time we want to give a special shootout to all the first time contributors at JabRef! We hope you had a positive experience so far and continue your contribution!

We thank the following external contributors who contributed code to JabRef releases v5.14 and v5.15.

> TODO:

Author: This sections needs to be generated again

### Other changes

Other notable changes include:

- A new Markdown Export format
- The Medline/Pubmed importer imports PMID as well
- Performance improvements when indexing linked files
- Clicking on a field in the integrity check now jumps to the corresponding field in the entry editor

Take a look at the [changelog](https://github.com/JabRef/jabref/blob/v6.0-alpha/CHANGELOG.md) for a full list of all changes.

## Breaking Changes

The [search syntax of static groups](https://docs.jabref.org/finding-sorting-and-cleaning-entries/groups#using-a-free-form-search-expression) changed. One can now mix regex and non-regex search.

## Known Issues

The new search has several issues:

- Searching for dates has issues ([#12296](https://github.com/JabRef/jabref/issues/12296))
- Exceptions when updating an entry ([#12169](https://github.com/JabRef/jabref/issues/12167))
- 100% CPU usage in some settings ([#12190](https://github.com/JabRef/jabref/issues/12190))
- The new search syntax is not yet documented. One can read the grammar at [Search.g4](https://github.com/JabRef/jabref/blob/v6.0-alpha/src/main/antlr4/org/jabref/search/Search.g4)

> In case of CSL, there might be two bibliographies generated ([#12262](https://github.com/JabRef/jabref/issues/12262))

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In case of the LibreOffice integration, there might be two bibliographies generated when using JStyles and CSL Styles together ([#12262](https://github.com/JabRef/jabref/issues/12262))
```

### Google Summer of Code

We thank Google for the opportunity and all three GSoC contributors for enhancing JabRef!

### Special Thanks

> This time we want to give a special shootout to all the first time contributors at JabRef! We hope you had a positive experience so far and continue your contribution!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This time again we want to give a special shootout to all the first time contributors at JabRef! We hope you had a positive experience so far and continue contributing!
```

> We thank the following external contributors who contributed code to JabRef this alpha release:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We thank the following external contributors who contributed code to JabRef for this alpha release:
```

The second big new feature is the new search. The new search is now based on an embedded PostgresSQL database. Originally it was planned to use Lucene as well but due to limitations this was switched during the GSOC project.

As part of this we finally brought back the so called "floating mode" for searches ![alt text](/img/Floating_Mode_Light_Theme.png) and fixed various other UI issues related to the search.

### Other changes

Other notable changes inlcude:

> - a new Mardown Export format

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- a new Markdown Export format
```
